[Music]
hi and welcome back
last time i spoke about parallel eq i
was talking about the implications of
using eq in multi-mic situations like a
drum kit or adding eq to parallel
compression channels
and the conclusion was
while you need to be a bit careful with
high or low pass filters
bells and shells will just work as you'd
expect and there's nothing to be scared
of there at all
my interest was peaked by a recent
reaper update which added a parallel
bandpass option to the stock eq plugin
but it turns out it doesn't work quite
as i expected i assumed that a band set
to this mode would run in parallel to
any other bands that were active
but that doesn't seem to be the case
apparently they only run in parallel
with other band pass filters which i
find slightly confusing if i'm honest
but no matter there's nothing to stop us
running a normal bandpass filter on a
parallel channel and setting this up
manually
with both dry and wet signals at unity
gain the result is this frequency
response which
looks suspiciously like a simple mid eq
boost
for reference here's a normal
bell-shaped midi q band doing 6.01 db of
boost
i knew i would need 6.01 db of gain
because that's how much boost you get by
simply doubling the waveform amplitude
and in fact most normal people are happy
to round this to 6 db
if i increase the gain of the bandpass
signal the boost is increased
just like turning up the gain of a mid
bell
and vice versa i can reduce the amount
of boost by turning the bandpass
filtered signal down below unity
if i set the gain back to unity
and then invert the polarity of the
filtered signal
we get a notch filter
literally the opposite of the bandpass
we started with
[Music]
but if i once again reduce the gain of
the filtered signal
i can tame this to become an eq style
cut
[Music]
anyway the point is it's perfectly
possible to implement an eq style mid
band by mixing in a parallel band pass
filter in just the right amount
[Music]
there are lots of really cool ways to
make use of this behavior within a mix
and i've promised a video on the subject
at least once before but this is not
that video sorry but i want to make sure
i do that one properly when i do make it
and you'll have to wait a little bit
longer
instead i want to talk about eqs that
use this behavior internally and create
the desired frequency response by
blending in low pass band pass or high
pass filtered signals in parallel rather
than running through eq style bell and
shelf filters in series
probably the most famous example of such
an eq is the pultec
that super important and useful low
frequency response is the result of
adding a low pass filter to create the
boost
while simultaneously subtracting a
different low pass filter tuned slightly
higher to create the cut
but i'm not going to talk about pull
text today because there's a more
interesting comparison available
this is nova from tokyo dawn labs
it's a modern style eq fully parametric
with nodes that we can drag around on a
graph
but internally it works by blending in
parallel filters
if i dial in 3db of mid boost
nova calculates just the right amount of
band pass filter to add to achieve that
boost
and if i dial in 3db of low shelf cut
nova calculates just how much low-pass
filtered signal to subtract
[Music]
so the question is does this actually
make any difference to the result
will an eq with a parallel topology
sound any different to a conventional eq
it's a good question
one obvious difference is the ease with
which a parallel style eq band can be
made dynamic
basically just compress or expand the
filtered signal and bob's your uncle
actually there's slightly more to it
than that
strictly speaking the gain modulation
will need scaling in the same way as the
gain parameter
but that's relatively trivial and easy
to optimize
by contrast a conventional eq is much
more of a challenge because dynamic
behavior will mean constant
recalculation of the filter coefficients
which is way more processor intensive
than just running an unmodulated filter
with static coefficients
but pro-q 3 uses a conventional topology
and still allows dynamic behavior
so it's clearly possible to make a
useful dynamic eq either way
in fact pro-q3 uses less cpu than nova
regardless of the dynamic settings at
least on my system so we can't really
list lower cpu as an advantage for
parallel eq in practice
and in practice the differences between
the dynamics in these plugins has way
more to do with the way the dynamics
processing itself has been implemented
pro q3 seems to react to peak levels
while nova uses something more like rms
both potentially useful but also really
different and not really comparable
as an illustration is a dynamic high
shelf in pro q3 set up to do more or
less full range compression
and here's the so-called wideband in
nova doing actual full band compression
in case you're not aware nova's wideband
covers everything that isn't covered by
another band so with no other bands
enabled that's the whole signal
[Music]
anyway these are just different sounding
dynamics algorithms and both will find
uses in different situations and i'm not
going to compare them any further
i'm going to focus purely on the eq
my question is does it actually make any
difference whether you design your eq by
chaining bell and shelf filters in
series
or by adding or subtracting filters in
parallel
is one approach inherently better
are there any significant differences in
practice
or are they just different ways to
arrive at mathematically the same result
i guess you all saw the null test coming
right here's pro q3 versus nova
i'm going to start with the free version
and with both plugins set flat they know
perfectly and the different signal drops
off the bottom of the analyzer
span is set to show down to minus 100 db
so we can be reasonably confident that
if there's no difference visible
anywhere on the graph they're going to
sound the same
now let's add a low shelf from both
plugins such to boost 12 db at 100 hertz
and there's a massive difference at all
frequencies
that doesn't seem right
and indeed it isn't nova and q3 both
offer auto gain options which try to
compensate the overall loudness when you
cut or boost
but q3s defaults to off while nova's
defaults to on
so let's turn it off in nova as well
and that's more like it
now we have a little bit of difference
showing around the region we're eq'ing
as you might expect
plus a bit of difference up at the
highest frequencies which might be more
surprising
let's address the latter first you'll
notice that pro q3 is running in zero
latency mode
but nova doesn't have a zero latency
mode and adds a little bit of latency
regardless of the quality setting
so perhaps a better comparison would be
with q3's natural phase mode which fixes
the phase response at the high end at
the expense of a bit of latency
and sure enough those high frequency
differences disappear
so what about the differences at the
shelving frequency the sharper eyed
among you might be shouting of course
they don't know you haven't matched the
cue controls
and indeed q3 is set to 1 while nova is
set to 0.71
however matching the numbers definitely
doesn't help because nova and q3
actually define the q parameter
differently
notice what happens if i turn the queue
down below one in the fabfilter plugin
the shelf slope becomes gentler and more
gradual
but if i turn it up above one it doesn't
really get steeper instead we start to
get resonant peaks and troughs on either
side
so a q of 1 in pro-q 3 gives you the
steepest shell slope possible with no
resonances
in nova the equivalent setting is 0.71
this is actually more correct in the
sense that this matches the usual
definition of q
but the discrepancy in the fabfilter
plugin is not a bug or a mistake rather
they make the conscious decision to
scale the queue differently to make it
more intuitive and make one the steepest
you can go with no resonance
in practice i don't think anyone dials
in specific q values for their cuts and
boosts you'll normally adjust this
setting by ear or perhaps with reference
to an analyzer
and the absolute q value doesn't matter
but this is a difference you need to be
aware of if you're trying to null the
plugins against one another
honestly this is a kind of frustrating
amount of difference
it's low enough to suggest it probably
isn't audible but not quite low enough
to be certain without some kind of
listening test
but let's shelve that idea for now and
finish working through the null tests
here's a bell-shaped boost at 150 hertz
i've set the queue to 1 again in the
fabfilter plugin
and again the closest match to this is
0.71 in nova
but we're again not quite nulling
perfectly
i feel i need to pause a moment to offer
some perspective
here's a full mix running through nova
set flat with the processing mode set to
precise
now i'll switch to precise plus
[Music]
can you hear the difference
subtle isn't it
in fact the plus represents extra
harmonics
as you might get from a transformer in
an analog device
basically it means subtle saturation
oh we all agreed that this is indeed
very subtle
okay now let's try the null test again
here's both plugins set flat and nulling
perfectly
and now with that subtle saturation from
nova
[Music]
as you can see that's a much bigger
difference than we saw from the eq
itself
but i still can't guarantee that these
eq differences are inaudible without
doing a listening test
before we get to that however i'm going
to switch to the gentleman's edition of
nova instead of the free version
this provides six bands instead of four
and some powerful and intelligent smart
ops features that i'm not going to talk
about at all today
but the difference we're interested in
for this comparison is in the quality
menu
this time we also get a choice of eq
curves
the musical curves are the same as those
in the free version of nova
but interestingly
the alternative surgical curves know
much better
the difference is really subtle you can
barely see any difference at all on the
graph display when i switch between the
two modes
but clearly the surgical curves are a
better match for those provided by the
fabfilter plugin
if i switch back to the low shelf
however
those differences persist whichever
curves i choose in nova
neither is obviously nulling any better
than the other
[Music]
and still the differences remain small
enough that i'm tempted to write them
off as inconsequential
while remaining large enough that i'm
not quite confident to do so
because here's the thing
while the differences between the
musical and surgical modes are indeed
very subtle
i nevertheless find they sound quite
different to me when i compare them with
real world settings
in fact subjectively i'd say the
differences between the different curves
are easier to hear than the differences
between saturated and clean in nova
despite appearing much more subtle in
the null test
and staying subjective for the moment
i always seem to have a preference for
the surgical curves
it doesn't seem to matter whether i
initially dial in my settings using the
musical or surgical setting so far
whenever i've switched between them i've
ended up going with surgical
i don't really know why and perhaps i'll
change my mind in future but there it is
whatever the reason if i have a
preference i can't really then claim the
difference is insignificant
[Music]
so here's a slightly different question
how different are the musical and
surgical curves to one another
let's check with the low shelf
as both variations seem to differ
equally from the fabfilter curve
and that's interesting
no difference at all
apparently the curve settings don't make
any difference to a low shelf boost
let's also check the cut
still no difference
the mid bell response is definitely
different we knew that already
what about the high shelves
good grief that's close
the difference is so subtle that if i
test the cut instead
it disappears off the graph
but that's kind of cheating
so perhaps we do need to consider the
curve setting when comparing the high
shelves
okay back to the fabfilter comparison
let's check the mid-range with a 500hz
bell boost
again we see a bit of a difference using
the musical curve
which drops to almost nothing when i
switch to surgical
what about the same test at one
kilohertz
when interestingly we start to see some
differences creep back in at the high
end
the surgical curve still knows a bit
better than the musical curve around the
eq center frequency
but neither option seems to affect the
high frequency differences at all
and switching q3 back to zero latency
mode definitely doesn't help natural
phase mode is still a much better fit
so i'm going to try a different tweak
the gentleman's edition of nova has
another extra feature in the form of an
insane quality option over and above the
default precise setting
as i understand it this increases the
internal oversampling factors used to
provide theoretically better quality
in all honesty i've never heard any
quality issues from this plugin when
using the precise setting but it's nice
to have a reassuringly over engineered
option for things like mastering
projects
now i happen to know that pro q3 doesn't
use over sampling at all so you might
expect that increasing the oversampling
factors in nova would increase the
differences between the two plugins
especially in the high frequencies
but actually it's the opposite
the insane setting removes those high
frequency differences again
which suggests that whatever the
fabfilter plugin does to correct the
frequency and phase cramping without
using oversampling it's mathematically
equivalent to using quite high
oversampling factors
okay let's shift the bell up to eight
kilohertz
relatively big differences here
again less so with the surgical curves
setting
and less still using the insane quality
but still a difference
and again big differences with the high
shelf comparison
insane works better still
but neither the musical or surgical
curves seem to match any better
so preliminary conclusion the
differences are mostly pretty small but
we can't say definitively that they're
inaudible
and the differences seem to be greatest
in the high frequencies
so let's try a listening test
i'm going to go with a believable real
world boost of 4 db
for a high shelf
in both eq plugins
and let's see if we can hear the
difference
so
what do you think
can you hear a difference
do you have a preference
so my own answers are yes i think i can
hear a difference but no i'm not sure if
i have a preference
but only when i'm switching between them
myself
when i can't see which is active and
can't hear the switch those answers
change to
no can't hear it and no don't care
you may of course have a different
opinion perhaps the differences seem
obvious to you and perhaps you have much
better ears than i do
but i'm sufficiently confident in my own
abilities to state that if i can't
reliably hear a difference then most
other people can't either
and the average music listener isn't
going to know the difference
so we're leaning towards the conclusions
that no the internal topology of the eq
you choose doesn't really matter and
that your choices of which frequencies
to cut or boost and by how much will
matter infinitely more
but hold your horses i haven't finished
yet
so far i've only tested one band at a
time
so let's go back to the null test and
try running a 500 hertz bell and a one
kilohertz bell at the same time
holy smokes they're nowhere near nulling
let's confirm that the 500 hertz bells
very nearly null on their own
[Applause]
and so do the 1k bells
but run both together and we see big
differences
what's going on here
let's see if plugin doctor can shed any
light on the subject
here's pro q3
running two bell boosts close to one
another
and notice how they both combine and
reinforce one another so with both on
together it looks like a single larger
boost tuned halfway in between
now let's try novo with the same
settings
and that's quite different
the two boosts don't combine with one
another in the same way and we see two
distinct peaks with a valley in between
this isn't a very subtle difference in
curve shape that we need to strain our
ears to detect
this is a fundamentally different
frequency response that we should
definitely expect to be audible
now in real world use we very often use
multiple bands in relatively close
proximity
so does that mean that actually in real
world use we should expect radically
different results from the two plugins
you're still holding on to those horses
right
because there's more what if we cut
instead
well initially we seem to get the same
results
two adjacent cuts in q3 combine to form
one larger cut
while adjacent cuts in nova remain two
separate cuts and cut less overall
but what if we have adjacent opposing
cuts and boosts
and suddenly the differences disappear
again
a boost next to a cut in q3 looks very
much the same on the analyzer as a boost
next to a cut in nova
and if we go back to the null test
this very much agrees
a 500 hertz cut next to a 1k boost gives
us possibly the best null all day
what a roller coaster ride we're on
so what's the conclusion
are the two methods of designing eq
equivalent
well no
or maybe sometimes
depends how you use them
and is one approach inherently better
than the other
i'd say no
probably not anyway
they're just different and sometimes
they'll give you different results
so despite them apparently providing
very similar feature sets i nevertheless
keep both q3 and nova ge in my plugins
folder and use them both regularly
and to be honest the different dynamics
behavior is so significant that this
would remain the case even if i'd failed
to find any differences in the eq's at
all
so what was the point of this video then
i hear you ask
i have absolutely no idea
that's all thanks for watching
[Music]